---
layout: entity
model: interpretation
id: E35

---

Scope and Usage
---------------

A VariantInterpretation is a statement about the pathogenicity of a given CanonicalAllele, usually for a given Condition.  A VariantInterpretation does not explicitly contain the reasoning and evidence supporting the conclusion, but that information is referenced in the provenance of the VariantInterpretation entity.  That is, the VariantInterpretation is, for example, the statement that a variant is pathogenic, the reasoning for that conclusion is found by following the wasGenerated attribute of the VariantInterpretation.

VariantInterpretations for pathogenic variants will include a Condition for which the conclusion was reached.  However, if the variant is determined to be benign (such as in the case of a very common polymorphism), then the Condition attribute may be unused indicating that the allele is benign for all conditions.  If a Condition is specified for a benign variant, then the conclusion that the allele is benign is limited to that specific condition.

The definition of many Conditions implies a particular mode of inheritance, but exceptions frequently exist.  Therefore, VariantInterpretations that include Condition should also include a modeOfInheritance attribute to explicitly state the modeOfInheritance about which this VariantInterpretation is made.

The criteriaSet describes the framework under which the VariantInterpretation was created.  If this attribute is not used, it indicates that no formal process was used in the creation of the VariantInterpretation.  

While the CriterionAssessments and the criteriaSet should be sufficient to understand the reasoning behind a given VariantInterpretation, a human-readable statement of this reasoning may be included in the explanation attribute (inherited from Entity).

VariantInterpretations are generated by a GenerateVariantInterpretation Activity.  

VariantInterpretations are frequently updated when new information becomes available, or during periodic review.  In such a case, a new VariantInterpretation is created.  A tie to the original VariantInterpretation can be maintained using the wasDerivedFrom attribute, which indicates the previous version of the current VariantInterpretation.
